After the pledges for Speaker were pretty well
secured for Mr. Clayton, and everyone was
resigned to the fact that he would be elected
Speaker in January of 1975 when the legislature
convened, I was in the Capitol,
two people that
associated with education stopped me to
congratulate me on the fact that I was going to be
appointed chairman of the Education Committee
when the legislature convened and the Speaker
made his appointments. I had served on the
Education Committee in the previous session and
then served on the Education Committee during the
Constitutional Convention. the second person
had told me this, I immediately proceeded to Mr.
Clayton's office and spoke
to him for the first time since
day blitz. I told him of the rumor that I had heard in
the Capitol, and I wanted him to understand that I
would rather serve on the Appropriations
Committee than be chairman of the Education
Committee. Of course, I did not get a commitment
from Speaker-elect Clayton at that time and did
not expect to. Shortly thereafter, I run into one
of his early supporters. In our discussions, He
indicated to me that he had an interest in
education and would like to serve on that
committee or to chair the committee. I asked him if
he had shared that with Mr. Clayton, and he said no,
they had not talked about it. I suggested to him
that he should do that and do it very soon. That was a
turning point or not, I do not know.
and was appointed Chairman of the Education
Committee. After our meetings I began to think
about my appointments and I thought maybe I will be
appointed as Vice Chairman of the House
Appropriations Committee since I was an early
supporter. Never occurred to me that I might have a
shot at being Chairman of the House
Appropriations Committee. I did not to say any
more to the speaker about it and leave it in his
hands as to what the appointment might be. That
committee appointments were being discussed in
his office on a daily basis. A constant source of
conversation once the legislature convened in
January and He was elected and committee
appointments were still pending. It wasn't until
the night before the committee assignments were
announced that the speaker pulled me aside at a
reception and told me that he was appointing me
chairman of the House Appropriations Committee,
that he had been under extreme pressure to name the
person who had turned the tide in the speaker's
race, but he just was not going to make that
appointment.
He did admonish me that I'd give A&M everything
they wanted, but between the two of us, we'd take
care of A&M. I told him he could always trust me to do
what was right. Later there was not only a great
deal of discussion about who would chair the
Appropriations Committee, but probably more
discussion about who would be the vice chairman.
Baker at one point wanted to name the former
chairman of the House Appropriations Committee
as my vice chairman.
Fortunately for me, he was talked out of that and
said that it would not be fair to me as chairman to
have a former chairman serving as my vice
chairman. I did serve on the committee, but not as
vice chairman. That first session in 1975 that I
served as chairman of the Appropriations
Committee was a very challenging one and a bigger
tasks than I had imagined. Working under the new
rules and in the open, the agencies of the state had
become much more aggressive.
Numerous members of the committee that had more
seniority than I had in the serving in the
legislature. Number five, chairman of major
committees that served on the Appropriations
Committee with me.
The first major challenge that I faced from Fred
Head, who had
helped the Speaker get elected by throwing his
support
behind him,
Prior to Labor Day, the
named chairman of the Higher Education
Committee, after his campaign to become chairman
of the House Appropriations Committee, had fell
short. In addition, he was a member of the House
Appropriations Committee. As chairman of the
Higher Education Committee, he had put together a
proposal for funding higher education that
was a severe attack on the Permanent University
Fund. He had taken Permanent University Fund
proceeds and appropriated for
operations at Texas A&M University, which gutted
the excellence fund that Texas A&M and the
University of Texas had enjoyed over the years.
Once I saw what Mr. Head was doing with his
proposal, I decided that I had to pick an issue that
I could beat him on. His proposal, he had refused to
use updated enrollments because this would take
another $17 million in general revenue funds to
fund the updated enrollments. Mr. Head laid out
his proposal. I asked if he had used updated
enrollments. He said he had not. I immediately
moved to use updated enrollments. He vehemently
opposed it, saying that it was going to cost us $17
million more to do so. And we took a vote, and he was
resoundingly defeated. I then announced that the
was adjourned pending the arrival of officials
from the Texas A&M system and the University of
Texas system who would appear before the
Appropriations Committee to give testimony with
regards to the use of the permanent university
fund. We had not had a
relation of the use of those proceeds and that Mr.
Head was attempting to fund those without the
committee having any knowledge of how those funds
were being expended. The next day, the House
Appropriations Committee convened with the
chairman of the board of the University of Texas
System, the former governor, Alan Shivers, and
Jack Williams, chancellor of the Texas A&M
University System, appearing before the
committee explaining how the proceeds of the
permanent university fund were being expended at
the two institutions. Once those explanations
were given,
had little problem in rejecting Mr. Head's
proposal that those funds be used for normal
operations at Texas A&M and University of Texas.
One of the lessons I learned in chairing the House
Appropriations Committee that first year was the
little attention sometimes that is paid to riders
that are placed in the appropriations bill. The
new rider placed in the bill by a House member that
provided that a person who accrued sick leave when
they left employment with the state could receive
a payment for that sick leave. I was concerned
about the rider when it went in, but decided that we
could handle it in conference committee and was
hopeful that the Senate would object to the rider
and insist that it be taken out of the bill.
Instead, little attention was given to it and the
rider stayed in the bill. And as a result, many of
the small agencies had difficulty in raising
funds to pay for sick leave when some of their
employees retired or left office. Not a workable
provision because most agencies do not keep
accurate records regarding sick leave days of the
executive officials. they were getting paid for
all of the sick leave days that they had accrued
with very few sick leave days taken off. Another
rider that became a problem and I had hoped would be
overlooked was one that authorized Texas A&M
University to cooperate with the South Texas
College of Law with affiliation agreements. I was
approached on a one-on-one basis by a senator on
the conference committee who had asked me to
support the rider and I agreed to if he would talk to
the Speaker of the House and get his agreement. The
speaker agreed. I showed the rider to my
conferees, and of course they acceded to my wishes
and said whatever I wanted to do. So the rider was
placed in the appropriations bill at the
conference committee level. Under the new rules
of the House, any new language had to be placed on a
resolution and passed in the House and the Senate.
The Senate passes these resolutions, still to
this day, passes the resolutions with little
debate.
The House might have done the same thing with
regards to this particular provision, but in the
process of putting it in the bill, one of the
legislators overheard what we were doing and
reported it to his legislator boss.
When the resolution was presented, which is a
rather thick document that shows all the changes
in the bill, this one item was flagged for
discussion.
They had given very little thought to the rider and
did not know exactly what it did. I knew that it did
not create a law school, but there was no
convincing the members of the legislature that it
wasn't the first step to creating a law school. And
a vote was taken and the provision was stricken.
During the legislative session in 1975, Robert
Preston, a half-brother, died suddenly of a heart
attack. Robert was about ready to retire from
Humble Oil and Refining Company in Baytown when
this occurred. Father's first wife was Della Edge
Presnell, and Robert was an offspring of that
marriage. She died shortly after Robert's birth.
My father subsequently married my mother. Della
Edge Presnell was a twin sister to Ella Benbow.
whose husband, Tom, ran a grocery store in Bryan.
And Robert stayed with the Benbos much of the time
as a young man. Thought of Aunt Ella and Uncle Tom
Benbo as members of the family. All of us personal
boys. September of 1975, shortly after that After
the legislative session, my father died at the age
of 83. He
has a distinction of being the only man in Brazos
County to have two sons serve in the legislature.
There have only been two or three sets of brothers,
to my knowledge, that have served in the
legislature. I don't know the numbers, but there
have been very few. My father always enjoyed
politics and I think he enjoyed campaigning, that
first campaign that I had in 1968. I'm glad that he
lived to see me serve in a leadership position in
the legislature before his death. I also lived to
see the family farm that I operated and still
operate under the family land heritage program of
the department of agriculture requires the same
family to operate the farm for over a hundred years
my farm is part of the twenty three hundred and ten
acres that great grandfather robert hutchpeth
had acquired in eighteen sixty six nineteen
seventy six the Texas Public Employees
Association came to me and asked me to carry
legislation that would provide that the state pay
the employee portion of the Social Security tax.
They had discussed this matter with former
Secretary of Labor Marshall, who was a member of
the University of Texas faculty, And he had
assured them that this would be tax-free money to
the employee
by the state paying the employee's portion.
Produced the bill in the House along with Senator
Doggett introducing a companion bill, Senate
Bill 20, in the Senate. With the bill passed, we had
to make some concessions. we had to cap the payment
at the then current rate of 5.85% and at the current
level of $16,500 that the state would pay. When we
passed the bill, we still did not know whether or
not
these funds would be tax-free to the employee. out
later that they were not tax-free and very little
advantage was received by the employees being
paid this way. Fortunately, it took a long time to
get the statute off the books because of the
mechanics of backing out the payment in a fair and
equitable way to the state employees. finally
repealed in the mid-1990s. The issue that we spent
a great deal of time trying to resolve was how to
control off-campus programs within our
community college system. Voices were being
taught in
various locations
The state was having to pick up the tab, yet there
was no control of the quality of these programs,
and there were certainly a lot of questions
regarding the
standards that existed in a lot of them.
Leadership positions of speaker, lieutenant
governor, and governor did not change in 1977. We
still had Bill Clayton as speaker, Bill Hobby as
Lieutenant Governor and Dolph Briscoe as
Governor, did see a rather dramatic change in the
makeup of the membership of the House
Appropriations Committee. The Speaker had
decided that Chairman of the Committee would not
serve concurrently on the Appropriations
Committee. It's created a lot of vacancies, which
he was more than happy to fill with people that
wanted to serve on the Appropriations Committee.
Because of these changes, I ended up with a
majority of big spenders,
lost control and committee of any ability to write
a bill that would viable should it be sent directly
to the comptroller. I rationalized to myself that
this was not a problem, that I would have control in
the conference committee and we could make the
bill certify at that point. The problem that I ran
into was that once we got the bill to the floor of the
House, I had very little support for its passage.
So we had to come up with some creative way to gain
support of the bill and get it passed and over to the
Senate and then to a conference committee. Had I
known we would have the problems we had on the
floor, I would have probably taken some positive
action to reduce the total amount of the bill in
committee just so that we could get the bill passed
in the House and in a conference committee.
The first three days we debated a bill making no
progress in reducing the size of the bill which
would be necessary to get the votes that we needed
to pass it. On the evening of the third day, As I was
preparing to get some rest
alone in my apartment in the old Stephen F. Austin
Hotel, when I heard this voice say, the author has
the right to perfect his own bill. I put my head on my
pillow. I realized that was the answer. that I had
to offer
perfecting amendments as the author of the bill to
reduce the amount to a level that would be
acceptable to the majority of the legislators.
The next morning, I arrived at the Capitol early
and directed staff to amend the bill back to the
level that was approved originally by the
Legislative Budget Board. In other words, cut out
everything that the committee had put in the bill.
We'd have to add some of it back in, but I thought we
could get reductions that way. My first estimate
was that we'd get about $200 million out of the bill
and hope that that would get us the votes that we
needed. As it turned out, we cut about $400 million
out of the bill on the floor of the House through the
author's perfecting amendments. This was
unpopular and unprecedented and caused a lot of
unrest, but it did get the bill approved. out of the
house and into conference committee where we were
able to make the necessary changes. I thought I had
met head on one of the most difficult challenges
that I had ever faced. Unfortunately, Texas
Monthly did not view it that way.
They came out with their list of the worst 10. My
name was on it. The speaker assured me that in the
future I would have more members that would
support me on the Appropriations Committee.
Depending upon the issue, about five votes out of
the 21 is all that I had during that entire session.
Later that year, during the interim, the Speaker
had asked a friend of mine and I to travel to
Olympia, Washington to review the
interactive budget monitoring system that had
been put in at the State Capitol in Olympia. The
Capitol had hired a number of former Boeing
aircraft employees that had intimate knowledge
of how
systems could be devised to provide support to the
legislature with regards to budgetary matters.
We were quite impressed with the system and came
back to the Legislative Budget Board and proposed
a feasibility study by Coopers and Libran to
determine what it would take to put in a system in
Texas. Things that would be required would be a
uniform system of accounting, which Texas did not
have within state government. And we realized
that this would be required. The prison librarian
did the study, and for a while that was, we thought,
the end of it. Surprisingly, we found out that they
were continuing to work and had ran up a $300,000
bill that they presented to us without the
legislature or the speaker or the lieutenant
governor or anyone authorizing such an
expenditure. I urged them that they should not be
doing this, that we had no authorization to
proceed.
The program was never approved and probably
should not have been. And the principles that
authorized this work and by the Cooper's and
Librand organization, I understand, were later
fired. We did have in 1979
or 81 had a resolution that would allow Cooper's
and Librand to sue the state of Texas for their
money that they had expended on this project. Of
course, the legislature did not approve a
resolution to sue itself, to allow itself to be
sued, I mean, and so Coopers and Libran remains
unpaid. In 1979, Bill Clayton continued to serve
as Speaker and Bill Hobby as Lieutenant Governor,
and we had the election of the first Republican
governor in 100 years. Bill Clements was elected
governor. Inflation rampant. It was necessary or
prudent to give the state employees a pay raise. Do
it on an emergency basis so that we could start
catching up on where we had fallen behind. Senator
Lloyd Doggett, a liberal Democrat, introduced
the bill in the Senate at 6.8%. At that time,
Governor Clements had given the bill to a freshman
state representative in the House for
introduction there.
The Senate quickly passed its bill and sent it over
to the House. I, in turn, asked the freshman House
member to pick up the Senate bill, but that we would
hold a hearing on his bill as well. Understood the
protocol that the bill that passed first would be
the one that would be used as a vehicle. Hearing was
held, but before we reported the bill out of
committee with any amendments, A conference was
held in the governor's office, and agreement was
reached that we would reduce the increase
to state employees from 6.8% to 5.1%. There was a
great deal of publicity given to the reduction
that was made, and even though the leadership was
all in concurrence,
their
mention ever made by this by the press. Two
significant appropriations in the 1979 session,
as far as Texas A&M University's system is
concerned, was an appropriation to the vet clinic
for its operations. In the past, the vet clinic was
expected to be self-supporting and not receive
any general revenue monies to operate the clinic.
It was also the session that the purchase money for
purchasing the Herman Professional Building in
Houston for the Prairie View Nursing Program was
provided. was always difficult to make decisions
regarding
private buildings for state use or to construct
new buildings.
Legislature just does not have a good handle on
doing these kinds of things. How do you decide on a
building in one part of the state versus a building
in another part of the state? These are decisions
that should be made at some other level rather than
at the legislature level. Where in 1980 it was
proposed that there be an appreciation dinner at
the Brazos Center to make a show of support and
raise some funds for my reelection campaign later
that year, should there be one. My supporters
decided that it should be a fish fry.
Sounded like a great idea. The only problem is it
turned out to be the coldest night of the year, and
the fish would not thaw. When the fish that was
frozen hit the grease, it would cool it down so fast
that we could not buy fish fast enough for the crowd
that we had that evening. the people that stayed at
home and watched the appreciation dinner or saw
the appreciation dinner on TV thought we had a huge
overflow crowd because people were standing in
line waiting to get their fish. The TV viewing
audience did not know was that we couldn't get the
fish to fry fast enough. I did file for reelection
in 1980 in
opposition.
There were several major issues that faced the
legislature in 1981.
Bill had Bill Clayton as Speaker, Bill Hobby as
Lieutenant Governor, and Bill Clements as
Governor. The issue at the end of each decade is
legislative redistricting. This indicated that
Brazos County now represented a perfect
district, population-wise. At first glance, one
would think this would make it quite simple,
but having a county with the exact population
required for a legislative district does create
problems. It removes flexibility that the
writers of the redistricting bill would like to
have in working with districts that surround the
county with the right population. I know Brazos
County was the only county that had such a
population. The fact of Brazos County having a
perfect population meant that two incumbent
colleagues in the legislature just west of Brazos
County ended up being paired. And the legislator
to the east had some difficulty in getting the kind
of district that he wanted. In the 1981 session, we
once again met the challenge of constitutional
amendment to the permanent university fund.
There was an effort to rewrite the higher
education portion of the constitution
to deal primarily with the issue of how the schools
outside of the permanent university fund are
provided their construction funding.
They had been using the 10 cent tax, i.e. 10 cents on
a $100 valuation,
to generate the revenues used by schools outside
of the permanent university fund. There was a
challenge to this fund as being
unconstitutional, and it was one that we were
likely to lose in the courts, thereby leaving
these schools with no source of funds.
Amendments are required to get 100 votes.
An amendment to the proposal was offered to put
Prairie View into the Permanent University Fund
for 1-6. I
felt like this was not
in our best interest since Prairie View was
actually over-built at the time and A&M was
under-built. And to put a formula in the
Constitution did not
sense.
I was defeated with regards to the amendment since
it took only a majority vote. But I was able to
garner enough votes in opposition to the
amendment to keep it from getting the necessary
100 votes required to pass. That brought a call
from Governor Clements to meet in his office and
discuss the issue. Governor Clements proceeded
to advise me that Prairie View had not been treated
fairly and started giving examples of
construction items that had not been funded at
Prairie View. I proceeded to point out to Governor
Clements that all of the construction items that
he had mentioned were items that only the
legislature could provide the funds and not the
A&M System Board of Regents. It is difficult to win
an argument with the governor and particularly
Governor Clements, I think I was able to persuade
him that we were not going to give in on the issue and
that there had to be some other resolution.
The session adjourned without addressing the
question of education funding in the
Constitution. The issues that I have dealt with
during my legislative years, the one that I caught
the most flack from my colleagues was the one
dealing with the teacher retirement system.
Prior to the session in 1981, I had asked the
Legislative Budget Board to consider what the
ramifications would be if we passed a statute that
required the teacher's retirement system to
implement the rule of 85. The rule of 85 being that
if your years toward retirement and your age
totaled to be 85, you could draw full retirement.
This was the system that was used in the state
employee's retirement system, and I had had
requests for this to be applied to the teacher
retirement system. I quickly learned that the
Legislative Budget Board did not get very good
information from the teacher retirement system,
and this had been a real problem.
This request of mine gave them the impetus to seek
information from outside sources regarding the
viability of the teacher retirement system. The
result of the study the Legislative Budget Board
made, it was determined that the teacher
retirement system could use their requirement
for general revenue appropriations by $217
million and still be the most viable retirement
system in the nation. The budget board met just
prior to the legislative session.
It was decided to go ahead and expend those funds
through the appropriations process on the
assumption that a bill would be passed that would
reduce the money flowing into the teacher's
retirement system by $217 million. I had made all
kinds of compromises with the teacher retirement
system to get the bill passed. The Retired
Teachers Association, they continued to hammer
away on their own legislators to the point it was
extremely difficult to get the bill passed.
Members that supported me on the issue to get it
passed apparently heard from their retirees into
the teacher retirement system for years to come.
In 1981, Ross Perot was heading up a program called
War on Drugs. This was to get some bills passed in
the legislature that would help curb the drug
traffic in Texas. I met with Mr. Perot
prior to the session in College Station here and
was supportive of what he was trying to do.
He had asked me to carry several of the bills, but I
declined on a basis that, as chairman of the House
Appropriations Committee, I just did not have the
time to carry additional bills. But I would help in
every way that I could to see that, to help get the
bills passed through the legislature. I asked him
to take to a friend of mine And I told this friend I
would help him with it. It was a bill that required a
triplicate prescription of all drugs that were
considered dangerous. I had a bill in the
Appropriations Committee to make Martin Luther
King's birthday a holiday. The members of the
committee were not supportive at all of this bill,
and I knew that the votes were not there. I did want
to do something with regards to holidays because
it had been something somewhat controversial.
I kept telling the author of the Martin Luther King
birthday bill that I... was working on something
and that i would uh... give him a hearing at the time
i got the other bill worked up and i found out that he
was uh... not letting the triplicate
prescription bill come out of his committee even
though the votes in the committee were there the
triplicate prescription bill uh... was a concept
that would hopefully reduce dangerous drugs by a
considerable amount. Finally, the author of the
bill brought the speaker to my desk and said, we
want to get the bill out of committee. And I said,
fine, I'll give you a hearing on your bill if you'll
pass out the triplicate prescription bill. His
reaction was, no way. that lasted about ten
seconds, and he came back and said, okay, it's a
deal. So I attempted to get his bill out once he had
passed the triplicate prescription bill out, and
of course I could not get the bill, necessary votes
to pass the bill. Understand that the triplicate
prescription bill has reduced drug trafficking
by a significant amount. 1981 was one of the first
years we had to deal with teachers' pay in the
Appropriations Committee.
We're falling behind in their pay because of the
high rate of inflation and the fact that teachers
have always been underpaid. One thing that I
wanted to avoid was the bill
more funds than the comptroller could certify.
The member who was handling the education portion
of the appropriations bill made a proposal to
provide a 28.5% increase for school teachers. I
knew what the fiscal implications were and did not
support his proposal. Consequently, it was
killed.
The speaker immediately contacted me and said
that was his proposal and He wanted it brought up. I
said, we don't have the money. He said, I've got the
money for you. I said, okay, if you assure me we've
got the money for you, I'll find a way to bring it
back up and we'll get it passed. So after a few
hours, it passed.